tHe poInt of art? What kind of question is that? 
While our best philosophers are pointing out the 
powerful difference in our interpretations of the 
same bits of culture (language, art, etc.), isn’t it 
puerile, if not idiotic, to think we can establish the 
point of anything? 
Shall we see?
there are conflicting voices everywhere. I 
wonder whether we might look sideways a little 
and sneak up on this many-sided mystery, holding 
all its activity still for the slightest of moments 
and thereby finding some harmony in the cymbalclashing din?
I’m not going to start at the beginning. We 
live in the ‘modern world’, or maybe it’s ‘supermodern’ or ‘postmodern’ or something like that. So 
let’s start with a modernist. Karl Marx, the famous 
socialist thinker, saw the basics of human life, 
the really important stuff, as air, water, food and 
shelter. these are the foundations of our lives, our 
‘economic necessities’. everything else – religion, 
art, music and philosophy – is a ‘superstructure’ 
balanced precariously on top. If you’re struggling 
to accept this, try comparing the wealth of most 
artists to the wealth of most bankers. oK then, 
but surely a cathedral, or Mozart’s Requiem, or 
picasso’s Demoiselles d’Avignon has to be more 
than just froth bubbling on the surface of trade? 
the old wisdom, after all, says that ‘man cannot 
live on bread alone’. I think the old wisdom is 
talking about love not art: the sea gypsies of Sana, 
for example, carry no paintings or sculptures in 
their tiny, crowded boats. Marx doesn’t leave it 
there, though. after all, gypsies famously sing. 
people deprived of any economic power, or 
advantage, create achingly beautiful appeals for 
something better. they sing up another world: a 
place where every tear is wiped from their eyes 
and their holy of holies cries ‘vengeance is mine’ 
at their oppressors. Marx sees these creations as 
the ‘cry of the oppressed creature’: a necessary 
reflection of and reaction to an out-of-joint world. 
He further argues that when freedom comes and 
oppression is lifted, religion and ‘art’, along with all 
other ‘opiates’, will be needed no more.
So, does this bring us nearer to an 
understanding? I think friedrich nietzsche can help 
move us on. He too describes art as a kind of ‘cry’. 
Like Marx, nietzsche sees culture as schizophrenic, 
bifurcated, but not, this time, because of 
economics. He sees instead a world filled with 
blood and filth, red in tooth and claw. He takes the 
name of Dionysius, the asian/Greek god of wine, 
wildness and debauchery, and applies it here. this 
‘Dionysian’ world is too much for us humans to 
bear, he argues. We need an escape, somewhere 
to run to. He sees things like God, poetry, music 
or romantic love as pretty illusions, sandy holes 
in which to hide from the carnage. He names this 
world of confections after apollo, the Greek god 
of poetry. for nietzsche we are still creatures 
of oppression, but this time oppressed by the 
unbearable brutality of our world. art is our frantic 
attempt to bury our heads and forget.
Well I think we are getting somewhere, but these 
are dark imaginings, aren’t they? What about the 
lovely paintings on our walls at home, harmony in form 
and tint? Surely someone is arguing for art as simply 
something beautiful and life enhancing? Guillame 
apollinaire is my favourite. He was friend and mage to 
picasso and the paris school of painters. He believed 
that artists are people who can ‘recognize the symbols 
without which humanity’s divine view of the universe 
collapses with dizzying speed’. along with Marx and 
nietzsche, he sees art as a kind of visionary weaving: 
as recognizing and representing moments that help 
us comprehend our mysteries. He lifts these visionary 
representations to the level of the divine.
So much of the art of the late twentieth and early 
twenty-first century, though, has signally nothing to 
do with the divine. We have broken beds filled with 
condoms, a self portrait made of blood, rotting meat 
eaten by flies, which then die, and a man hung by his 
feet bleeding over the stage from his own slit wrists. 
Is there divinity there? really? Before we become 
completely mired, I think the philosopher Georg 
Hegel can help us with this apparent contradiction. 
He argued that in many cultures, art and religion are 
effectively the same thing. So the cave paintings of 
Lascaux in france, the temples at Khajuraho in India 
or the Hebridean Book of Kells cannot be picked 
into separate parts that represent ‘religion’ and ‘art’. 
once religion and art become separated, as in our 
society, with the former being the proper concern of 
theologians and philosophers, he thinks that art loses 
its social power and significance. Charles Saatchi 
evidences this loss wonderfully: in his ‘Sensations’ 
exhibition, the only thing linking the various works 
on display was their notoriety. the nature and 
purpose of art at that time had become so uncertain, 
so contested, that the only sure way to recognize 
something as art was to see a tabloid newspaper 
headline asking IS tHIS art? Questioning its nature 
ironically secured it as such.
How did this happen? How did painting and 
sculpture become so divorced from social purpose? 
the flag went up, I suspect, with the early twentiethcentury french artist Marcel Duchamp. When he 
placed an off-the-shelf toilet bowl, signed with a 
fictitious artist’s name, in a gallery, he made concrete 
the notion of art as the action of an ‘artist’. His 
intention may have been ironic, but he nonetheless 
reinforced the post–renaissance european elevation 
of ‘artists’ from anonymous craftsmen into celebrities: 
if a person is an ‘artist’ (and therefore somehow 
different and special) then whatever they do is 
necessarily ‘art’. the ready acceptance which followed 
the fêting of Duchamp’s joke led, inevitably, to 
galleries filled not just with brilliance and wonder, but 
with the mundane and pointless, curated by people 
overly concerned with image, position and fashion; 
in short, people deeply afraid of not ‘getting it’ (even 
when there was nothing to ‘get’). ever more strident 
cries went up, everyone shouting ‘art is over here’. 
people outside of this nepotistic world could only 
look on, confused and bewildered. By sophisticating 
it to the point of incomprehension, these contesting 
voices wove an impenetrable wall around ‘art’, so that 
tabloids became, for many people, the arbiters and 
labellers. art, essentially, had eaten itself. 
Ironically, though not surprisingly, this melee has 
resulted in a retrenchment, as interest in art as a 
series of socially mediated practices has grown. an 
audience tired of headlines, of art as pr, of hollow 
pretentiousness and blood, seems more and more 
attracted to demonstrations of craft skill and dexterity, 
in areas traditionally recognized as characterizing 
the ‘artist’. Galleries in my own town are filled with 
drawing, painting, textiles and ceramics, mostly 
adorned with figuration. In a way, this is the final 
divorce, moving art from the centre of our world, 
as the carrier of dreams and aspirations, to more or 
less pretty demonstrations of the mastery of media, 
trading the recognition of the ‘divine’ symbol for the 
role of decoration.
So is that it? Well let’s finish with one last voice. 
the painter piet Mondrian created some very famous 
highly-abstracted works. Mondrian significantly 
predicted that film, television and photography would 
replace painting in the popular imagination. If you 
need proof of this, compare the numbers of people 
passing through the doors of the galleries with the 
numbers passing through cinema box-offices, or 
subscribing to satellite broadcasting. He believed that 
as people turned away from one they would turn to 
the others. 
I wrote my book Robert Frank’s ‘The Americans’: 
The Art of Documentary Photography about a Swiss 
photographer working in america in the 1950s. frank’s 
work contains brilliant and seminal photographs that 
embody exactly what Mondrian was talking about. 
taken together, his images are perhaps the finest 
description and analysis I’ve ever seen of america, the 
dominant culture of the world in to which I was born. 
frank’s book helped me understand myself, by coming 
to an understanding of the world that made me. His 
art is resolutely located in the discussion of belief and 
meaning, honestly recording and examining what he 
saw. now perhaps more than at any time since it was 
published, we need his book. It is a mirror, reflecting 
vision and wisdom back at us from our generation’s 
formative days. ‘those who ignore the past are 
doomed to repeat its mistakes’, the old wisdom says. 
In these dangerous and difficult days, we have need 
of works that help us understand who we are, where 
we come from and where we are going. Some might 
argue that this has always been the point of art.